welcome to topcast and to the final
regular episode on my discussions of
chiara marletto's the science of canon
cat this is chapter seven titled a
journey there and back again which as a
tolkien fan evokes for me
the subtitle of tolkien's book the
hobbit and that subtitle was
there and back again
in the universe of the lord of the rings
the hobbit was actually written by the
hobbit bilbo baggins and it was called
in that universe there and back again
and here in this final chapter i can
draw a couple of parallels between
kiara's book here as well as constructor
theory more broadly and some of the
themes in tolkien's work
now before i begin the first thing to
mention is that for viewers on youtube
for example but not for listeners we
have something for viewers just to look
at and don't worry if you're simply
listening on audio podcast as this will
make no difference to the substance of
today's episode but i have provided some
vision simply because well we're talking
about a chapter titled a journey there
and back again so i thought it might be
nice to have some video of some of the
journeys or walks i take frequently on
the south coast of australia near a
place called sanctuary point this place
is interesting because it demonstrates a
certain dichotomy in a rather beautiful
way
some people like to be surrounded
entirely by civilization to live as
close to the center of a city for
example as possible that's not really me
some people like to live entirely
surrounded by nature and that's also not
me i like those places that are really
on the border where just behind you is
civilization and you're in it
but you've also got a view of the
entirely undeveloped and natural
environment i like to be able to see
what hasn't yet been developed but might
be it could be the so-called natural
environment and the built environment
coexisting side by side places where
humans have constructed by turning the
resources they've identified into
dwellings and roads and whatever else
and the place is so far undeveloped
tolkien's work is rather pessimistic in
this regard he was one of the first
greenies i suppose
he saw industry broadly speaking as a
blight on the landscape and all of his
works from the silmarillion through the
hobbit and lord of the rings have at
their heart a message about decay and
the loss of nature corruption was what
he was often on about and mentioned in
his books and what he seemed to mean by
the word corruption rather often is
something about where technology of a
kind came along and ruined a natural
forest or something like that
it's not exactly a picture we get of the
world that i explain here it's quite the
opposite now of course tolkien lived
through he spent his formative years in
the first world war and so he saw the
destructive aspects of technology and so
that has
colored his view of the impact of humans
on the environment of course and he
lived through a time when he was no
doubt witnessing the rapid pace of
change in parts of rural england what
the green countryside went through in
places where coal mines and the burning
of very smoky unfiltered stuff in order
to lift people out of poverty was
occurring
economics is not something he really
focused on in lord of the rings but i
digress just to say that the vision for
today's episode the videos that viewers
are seeing exist to give people
something anything really to look at but
it's not entirely random it does give a
sense of a journey and it does provide
something of that dichotomy between the
natural environment and those places
where human knowledge has transformed
the world into something less hostile
the other thing to notice here is that
being australia for most of these video
clips you can get some sense of the
proportion here of the undeveloped part
of the country which is the overwhelming
majority of the land mass and these
little specks of development we call
cities and towns by comparison
nature has constructed almost everything
we still see if you step beyond your
tiny city humans have just begun to
scratch the surface of the landmass that
is australia to say nothing of the rest
of the world or the solar system let
alone the universe
it is so very early in the history of
humanity we have had almost no impact
yes i know unpopular opinion apparently
we are uniquely destructive and we are
almost at a tipping point where the
damage we have done will be irreversible
i know of course i do not view human
activity as damaging i view the
environment and the cosmos as damaging
to us lethal even we build and construct
in order to provide some scant
protection against the forces of nature
arrayed against us whether those be
cosmic in the form of asteroids
supernovae
long-term climate changes or more
urgently just catastrophic weather
events like floods and storms and fires
or other natural disasters like
volcanoes earthquakes and tsunamis
planet earth is a veritable death trap
without our energy technology and
explanatory knowledge helping us to
scratch an existence out from this
otherwise implacably hostile rock i've
made the point before that if we don't
do what we can to control the
environment it will control us and
eventually destroy us and everything
else on the planet that's simply a
logical consequence of what we know from
physics and science either the
asteroid's going to hit us or the sun's
going to engulf us or at least expand so
much the oceans boil unless we learn
what to do about all this
the kangaroos aren't going to do it the
bacteria aren't going to do it the trees
aren't going to do it we need to create
fundamental far-reaching knowledge now
which is one reason i've read this book
about constructor theory purportedly the
most fundamental theory of physics we
now have or at least one of them
and that book comes to an end today this
is the first popular science book to
have been written on constructor theory
it may not be it should not be the last
it may be that constructor theory
reaches into areas of science and
philosophy and much more in such a way
as to radically transform our
understanding of physics and life and
ourselves that we can use it to solve
some of the biggest problems
this final chapter is an excellent one
for bringing together the previous ones
because it serves as something of a
summary of the rest of the book and then
it looks forward to what we can hope for
with constructor theory off into the
infinite future and well let's just get
into it chiara begins in summary with
quote at the beginning of this book i
made an ambitious claim i promised to
present a new perspective on physical
reality by explaining how to understand
and think in terms of counterfactual
properties of physical systems it is now
time to head back to where the journey
began and to contemplate the new
understanding that we have gathered
along the way with the last page
approaching one has to operate like a
thoughtful traveler nearing the end of
their journey
review the things that seemed noteworthy
consider what new avenues they open up
and whether they are fuel for the
creation of further knowledge the
central motivating idea of this book is
that a class of properties has been
largely neglected in science and that
this needs to be remedied because it is
preventing progress on fundamental
problems
i call those properties counterfactuals
they are not specifiable by describing
the actual state of a physical system
nor its law of motion to specify them
one has to describe the system in terms
of what transformations are ultimately
possible or impossible to perform on it
as i have explained counterfactuals are
lurking at the core of most exciting
open problems in fundamental physics i
mentioned several examples the
interoperability of information chapters
three and four the no cloning property
and the reversibility of quantum
information chapter four the resilience
of knowledge chapter five the
conservation of energy and the
distinction between work-like and
heat-like energy transfers chapter six
and the information-based
interoperability of work media and
thermodynamics chapter six the main
counterfactuals we have explored in this
book are summarized in the table that
follows and i'll read through the table
so we've got the phenomenon of
information the counterfactuals involved
are the possibility of flip and copy the
physical laws involved are
interoperability of information media
and the notable related entities are the
universal computer and the universal
constructor let's pause there and just
mention
when chiara says
interoperability my understanding of
that is substrate independence what that
means is that when you've got an
information media it's independent of
the physical characteristics of that
particular material so you can have the
same information written on a piece of
paper you have the same information
painted onto a window presumably you
have the same information represented in
the pixels of a computer screen or in
the memory of a computer hard drive and
so on and so forth in the mind of a
person indeed has some arrangement of
neurons in the brain so this is
interoperability the same information
can exist in different physical forms
another phenomena that kiara mentions is
quantum information the counterfactual
involved there is the impossibility of
copying certain information carrying
states the possibility of reversing any
transformation the physical laws
governing this again is interoperability
of information media and the notable
related entities are the universal
quantum computer and the universal
constructor the next phenomena that
chiara went through was knowledge which
she defines as resilient information the
counterfactual involved there is the
ability to enable transformations and of
remaining embodied in physical systems
the physical laws for knowledge have not
yet been discovered but the notable
related entities are abstract catalysts
and the universal constructor and the
final phenomena covered was work and the
counterfactuals involved there were the
possibility of see-sawing
transformations and the impossibility of
changing energy without side effects
that's the conservation of energy the
physical law involved is the
conservation of energy the
interoperability of work media and the
counterfactual second law of
thermodynamics and the related entities
are the scale independent heat engines
scale independent means it doesn't
matter whether it's big or small and the
universal constructor wants more and
then she goes on in the text to say
quote having now an overall perspective
one might notice that two general facts
emerge the two overarching ways in which
the power of counterfactuals expresses
itself the first is that adopting
counter factuals brings entities that
look superficially like immaterial
abstractions into the domain of physics
information and knowledge for example
have been traditionally considered as
mere abstractions as things that do not
belong to the physical world however by
considering the counterfactual
properties of physical systems that
enable information and knowledge one
refutes this idea because whether or not
a physical system has those properties
is set precisely by the laws of physics
end quote yes and so whether or not
something can generate knowledge or can
contain information depends upon whether
the laws of physics say that entity can
do so and indeed what the limits of
knowledge creation are is bounded by
what we know about the laws of physics
although knowledge is an abstraction of
a kind it must be instantiated somewhere
to count as knowledge if you can't
instantiate it doesn't count as
knowledge and that includes inside your
mind so if you have knowledge in your
mind obviously it's instantiated there
in your brain it's represented somehow
encoded but that encoding process is a
physical process okay this is related to
the mathematician's misconception that
i've spoken about in top cast over the
last few weeks and months we cannot
divorce therefore epistemology from
physics in any way shape or form these
these things are intimately related now
precisely what the relationship is and
what laws of physics will come to bear
on the possibility of generating
knowledge we don't know yet we just know
that it must in principle be bound by
the laws of physics in ways i've
mentioned but in new ways as well yet to
be discovered which hopefully
constructive theory will have something
to say about let's continue
cara says quote
the other fact is that embracing
counterfactuals allows one to express
exact laws about entities traditionally
considered as approximate because these
laws refer directly to the macroscopic
world such as information energy heat
and work when the counter factual
properties enabling those entities are
made explicit it is elegant and easy to
express laws about the systems
displaying those properties without
approximations this is how the power of
counterfactuals allows one to ground
concepts that would otherwise be
considered abstract or approximate in
exact fundamental physical laws the
logic of how that is done is the same
for all the entities discussed in this
book it is a unifying trait first one
expresses the counterfactual property
that is required of our physical system
for it to embody the entity in question
for instance if the entity is
information the counter factual
properties that the system must possess
are the possibility of the flip and the
copy transformations
then one can express regularities about
the physical systems with those
counterfactual properties in the form of
laws of physics for instance
interoperability laws for example a bit
of information
looks like a pure abstraction until we
view it through counterfactuals then one
notices that for a system for example a
switch to qualify as a bit of
information it must have two
counterfactual properties one that it is
possible for it to be in either of the
two physical states on and off and two
that the state on and the state off can
each be permuted into one another and
also copied into any other physical
system that itself has these same two
counterfactual properties whether a
system has these two counterfactual
properties it qualifies as an
information medium you see then why a
bit is not an abstraction independent of
the physical world whether or not
something has those properties depends
entirely on the laws of physics
unlike say whether a given number is a
prime number which does not depend in
the least on what the laws of physics
are those counterfactuals provide the
link between information and physical
laws in addition one can state an
interoperability law about the system
that is displaying those counterfactual
properties the interoperability law
explains why the counterfactual
properties though physical are not
dependent on most of the details of the
physical systems it is because
when there is an interoperability law
those properties are shared by a class
of physical systems the details of the
systems all belonging to the same class
become irrelevant end quote again
that's substrate independence it doesn't
matter if the information media is paper
magnetic tape pits in a compact disk
whatever the same information can be
transmitted from one medium into another
the details of what the stuff is made of
whether it's paper or magnetic tape
doesn't matter now what matters is
whether you can do these flip and copy
operations so i'm skipping a number of
paragraphs and i'll pick it up where
cara writes quote
as i have explained time and again the
traditional conception of physics cannot
express counterfactual properties the
traditional conception can refer to the
state of a switch either on or off at
any given time and can predict what the
state will be at a later time and why
however a statement of this kind does
not tell us anything about what
transformations are possible or
impossible in the switch this is why
turning to counterfactuals and related
laws is essential to capture the physics
of phenomena such as information and the
other entities you have discovered in
this book end quote so it really is a
simple but profoundly deep idea you've
got a switch okay so you could do
traditional classical physics or even
quantum theory and have some prediction
about what the outcome of a particular
process is going to be is the switch
going to end up on or off but at no
point do you need to actually say if you
ignore counterfactuals what the
possible states of that switch are going
to be that is a counterfactual claim
saying it could be in the on position or
it could be in the off position is
irrelevant to what you're trying to do
what you're trying to do is to make a
prediction and so it comes back to
understanding to some extent as well a
whole new mode of explanation a new way
of looking at this situation i know it's
simple okay it's a switch but you can in
principle imagine this to be generalized
to other more complicated more
interesting situations but if we're just
talking about the switch one would think
if you want to have a fundamental
physical understanding of this object
you should want to know well it can be
one of two states and if you're sitting
there thinking this is trivial yeah it
kind of is but here the two
physics physics mind you fundamental
physics didn't have anything to say
about this but now there is a way there
is a framework there is this constructor
theory which allows us to talk about
well the switch could be on and it could
be off it's impossible for it to be
otherwise it's not going to be something
else it's not some third state it's
honor it's off and it is able to perform
as a bit doing this particular operation
okay let's continue right quote there is
another unifying aspect of the approach
i have been advocating which was
foreshadowed at the end of chapter two
all the counterfactual properties you
have encountered are expressible as
statements about which transformations
are possible and which are not and why a
daring speculation is therefore that
all the laws of physics could be
formulated solely in terms of principles
about counterfactuals and that the laws
of motion follow from them as derivative
and perhaps approximate properties
exploring this possibility is the start
of an exciting research program end
quote okay so just just a little bit on
the philosophy of science i suppose
chiara says there this could be the
start of an exciting research program
research program so papa talked about
research programs okay this is the idea
that it it forms a kind of overarching
framework deeper than a particular
theory so although constructor theory is
called constructor theory and it would
be testable in a whole number of
different ways what we have are the
beginnings of ways in which to
conduct scientific research to find
particular laws and that's what a
research program is it's kind of a
broader conception it's almost like a
view of science a view of the way in
which physics in this case could be done
but of course constructor theory isn't
broader even than
just physics it reaches into biology it
reaches into epistemology it's sort of
like the physics of those areas the
dividing lines between these domains are
of course not sharp but whenever i hear
research program being used in this
technical way i immediately think of
popper's remarks about evolution by
natural selection darwinism because
people would ask poppy you know well
does this count as does evolution by
natural selection count as a scientific
theory in your sense because in what
sense is it testable
people will often say things like well
you know clearly evolution by natural
selection is testable haldane said the
great defender of darwin was well one
way you could test this is if you find
rabbits in the precambrian in other
words
the evolution of a complex organism like
a rabbit at a time prior to the
evolution of any complex life at the
cambrian period of geological strata you
had this thing called the cambrian
explosion and then lots of complex life
arose after that but before that you
didn't have complicated life so if you
found rabbits there this would refute
the claim that evolution by natural
selection is this gradual process of
evolution increased complexity of life
but in fact in fact as many people have
observed since then that's not a
refutation of evolution by natural
selection if you did indeed find rabbits
in the precambrian if you found rabbits
much much much earlier in the fossil
record than you expect that would be a
problem but it would not in any way
shape or form refute evolution by
natural selection it could just mean
that well rapids evolved more rapidly in
that particular place than they did
anywhere else and well they still
evolved and they still evolved by
evolution by natural selection and
there's your fossils the rabbits in the
pre-cambrian exist there because the
best explanation is they really did
evolve really really quickly that's
possible that's possible so it doesn't
refute evolution by natural selection so
then we've got a problem don't we in the
history of science or the history of
ideas and the philosophy of science if
evolution by natural selection is the
deepest theory of biology in what sense
is it truly a scientific theory if we
can't test it is there any way of doing
an experiment which would refute it what
observation would we have that could not
possibly be explained
by evolution by natural selection and
this is why poppa said well it's better
to consider that as the
research program it's a it's a it's a
framework in which we think about all
the different ways in which we can have
theories of biology and theories of
genetics and all this kind of stuff that
is related to the question of evolution
by introspection evolution by natural
selection is just the underlying fact
it's the only possible way in which in
which evolution can happen we can rule
out lamarcism we can rule out
creationism the only thing we've got
left the only explanation we've got is
evolution binaural selection so you
can't test it after all tested against
what there's no viable alternative so
that's one thing to say about this but
even in principle there's no observation
that we can have unless you saw
sometimes the spirit from the sky come
down and wave a literal magic wand and
and create life there in front of you
then you might have something although
then again that entity that spirit
whatever it is that was doing the magic
the creator maybe that thing evolved
so if if that evolved well then that
doesn't refute evolution by natural
selection you just have to appeal to
evolution by natural selection to
explain the existence of the creator i
suppose so maybe evolution by natural
selection is unfalsified but that does
not make it a bad theory it might make
it kind of outside of science or prior
to science in a way kind of like
falsifiability itself you know the whole
concept of falsification is not itself
falsifiable certainly a crucial part of
science so is it part of science or is
it not part of science it's kind of
prior to science you know the theory
that in geology
rocks exist
volcanoes exist
these theories of existence that these
things just are well they're not
falsifiable either you make any claim of
anything existing so what this has to do
with anything is that
constructor theory might be considered
as the start of an exciting research
program as well as a set of
physical laws or ways of informing our
under deeper understanding of physical
laws let's keep going kara says quote to
develop it this exciting research
program one would have to formulate laws
of physics about systems displaying the
counter factual properties discussed in
this book and to show that dynamical
laws such as quantum theory and general
relativity are emergent derivative
approximations
following from those principles this is
potentially a whole new avenue for
physics being opened up by taking
counterfactual seriously it is for
physicists and other scientists and
philosophers to explore its developments
in the years to come a program of that
sort is no simple matter for a start in
order to adopt any of these putative
laws about the counterfactuals as laws
of physics one would have to ensure they
are testable end quote so what kara's
saying there is that you would need to
find laws themselves that are testable
counter factual laws that are testable
but this is different too for any
individual particular counter factual
physical law being testable which makes
it therefore scientific this is a
different question too whether the whole
research program that we might label
constructor theory whether or not that
thing is testable whether whether the
existence of counterfactuals in the
world and the fundamental nature of
the counterfactual properties of
physical reality the physical laws
whether that is testable you know it
simply just seems to be the truth of the
matter it just is the case that these uh
counterfactuals exist in reality that's
a research program but that itself might
not be testable it's sort of prior to
the scientific theory itself it's the
thing inside which other theories
testable theories are nested in the same
way that in biology all the theories of
genetics and the way individual species
happen to evolve over time is nested
within this broader
view of biology as species evolving via
the process of natural selection that
just is the case and now you then use
that to see what follows what specific
biological laws you end up
and biological knowledge you end up
creating which itself is testable chiara
goes on to say and explains what fans of
topcast will be more than familiar with
but let's just read through it anyway
kyo writes quote a law is testable if it
produces predictions about observable
traits of a physical system testability
as i mentioned in chapter 2 is a pillar
of the scientific method where a theory
that makes testable predictions can be
refuted if its predictions are not borne
out by experiments a classic example as
recounted in chapter 2 is testing a
prediction about the speed of a ball of
a given mass rolling down a slope with a
given inclination economics and medicine
are two disciplines where testability is
problematic because although predictions
can be made it is hard to make repeated
experiments under control conditions to
check the predictions against reality
physics on the other hand is privileged
because many of its predictions are
testable can principles about
counterfactuals be tested
yes but the process is one step removed
from the tests of rolling ball
predictions that you saw in chapter 2
principles such as the conservation of
energy are in general tested by deducing
their implications for the behavior of
physical systems that are assumed to
obey them principles are
laws about laws they are meta-laws
one needs first to have at least two
rival theories concerning a physical
situation
to which the principal purports to apply
for instance one can consider a model
for a pendulum that obeys the principle
of energy conservation for example a
model based on newton's laws and then
another model that does not predicting
that once the pendulum is set into
motion it spontaneously swings to higher
and higher points then one performs an
experiment with an actual pendulum to
test the prediction of one model against
the other in the case of the pendulum
all experiments done so far have refuted
the model that predicts that energy is
spontaneously created whenever it looks
as though the pendulum swings to higher
and higher points it is because some
nearby system is actually providing the
energy to do so for instance by driving
the oscillations with some mechanical
engine which provides the required
energy for the swings
so far the principle of conservation of
energy has withstood all tests performed
on it in its domain of applicability
okay i'm going to skip a fair bit and
i'm going to pick it up in the chapter
where chiara begins to talk about right
about rather a
part of science she is actively engaged
in in physics in trying to
measure things that obey well you're not
really sure what laws these things obey
maybe they obey the laws of general
relativity and maybe they obey the laws
of quantum theory and maybe these two
sets of laws actually
make incompatible claims about reality
so
this is an interesting place where
constructor theory can have something to
say let's read what she says about this
intriguing experiment that she's been
working on and she writes quote the
principle of interoperability
also has an intriguing twist which
allows one to make predictions about
physical systems without knowing exactly
what their laws of motion are it is
something i have been working on for the
past few years with dynamical laws the
only way to make predictions about what
happens when two systems are considered
together is to know the dynamics of each
of them as well as how to construct the
composite laws of motion but sometimes
one does not know all that for example
it is still a matter of heated debate
whether and how gravity obeys quantum
theory the reason is that the current
best explanation for gravity is general
relativity a theory with no quantum
information media in it so we may not
have all the tools to describe the joint
motion of a qubit
interacting with gravity
yet we may still want to make certain
testable predictions about that system
end quotes so that's intriguing you can
read more by
looking up chiara and these gravity
experiments how a cubit behaves in a
gravitational field so you've got a
qubit which is clearly being governed by
a quantum theory but then you're looking
at how it behaves according to gravity
so then you've got general relativity so
trying to marry up these two things
in such a way as you're you're observing
it observing its behavior and so coming
to a deeper understanding and i'll go
back to the book and uh just pick it up
where she talked about something
slightly different but she says quote
other times even if the law of motion is
known it is too complicated to follow
all the motions of the constituents of
one of the systems this is the case for
complex molecules that have so many
sub-particles that it is impossible to
use the laws of motion to predict their
behavior too complicated even for the
existing supercomputers in such cases
counterfactuals come in very handy
because they allow us to still make
predictions and quote yeah so even if
you've got complicated molecules and
we're just talking about molecules then
you can't make predictions about the
evolution over time of the system of
molecules interacting just because the
subparticles the smaller particles that
make up the bigger molecules
are just too many and too complicated so
never mind when you get to the level of
cells made up of
millions of molecules and never mind
when you put the cells together and you
get an animal and never mind when the
animal gets complicated that is a person
and never mind when you put people
together and you get social and
political and economic systems
and people think you can reduce these
things to dynamical laws people trying
to make predictions about the stock
market and people try to make
predictions about
people making shopping choices and so on
and so forth
we can't do it with simple or
complicated molecules and we're going to
struggle to do it with simple molecules
by the way so all this is to say that
this traditional conception of physics
in terms of dynamical laws that allow us
to just make predictions of the
evolution of the system over time well
not applicable when you get more
complicated systems but maybe a
counterfactual approach
can bear fruit and chiara writes on this
quote why because they counterfactuals
hold for those systems irrespective of
their details imagine that you know
two systems each qualify as a bit but
you do not know all the details of their
dynamics nor how to describe the
dynamics when they interact with one
another the interoperability of
information would still allow you to
make predictions about certain tasks on
the composite system because it is based
on the counterfactuals rather than on
the dynamics this is an example of how
the laws about counterfactual properties
can be useful and go beyond the testable
predictions of known dynamical laws i
want to mention a very recent example
where this logic applies which is at the
heart of the current struggle to merge
the two best explanations of the
universe known to us quantum theory and
general relativity there are some
physical systems such as particles with
masses comparable to those of human
cells for which both gravity and quantum
theory are thought to be relevant yet
there is no unified dynamical law that
describes a system that both gravitates
and is quantum there have been brilliant
proposals to achieve that unification
but to date none of these candidates has
been conclusively chosen over the others
when it comes to those systems we do not
know what law of motion we should be
using to make predictions still we know
that the counterfactual interoperability
law applies in that domain even when the
specific laws of motion are unknown so
we can use the interoperability law to
make predictions in that domain this
approach with counterfactuals has
recently led to an idea to test effects
in quantum gravity which has created a
lot of interest within the quantum
gravity and the experimental communities
the race to realize the experiment has
started and if it is realized it could
finally refute the idea that gravity is
not quantum such as the reach of
counterfactuals they provide a powerful
underpinning of deep conceptual ideas as
well as the robust theoretical nature to
support experimental ideas of this kind
i expect there will be more experimental
ideas to come in addition to the
exciting consequences for physics
switching to counterfactuals has deep
important implications for other fields
one of them could be to revolutionize
the understanding of knowledge end quote
and just my reflection in this
this is a purported experiment by the
way you can just do a google search to
find out more of the details just type
in kiara and vladko who's her
collaborator on this
gravity and qubit so they're your four
big things that said the two authors of
the paper and the the two concepts we're
talking about here now one of the papers
by kiara nvlanco appears in the journal
nature one of the most prestigious
journals in the world and you can look
up the details there and they talk about
how
feynman was the one who first suggested
coming up with some kind of test and so
they've come up with a kind of test
these experiments about quantum theory
and general relativity but now kiara
goes on to talking about counterfactuals
and the relationship to knowledge
explanatory knowledge and she writes
quote i said that knowledge is a
particular type of information with the
counterfactual property of being
resilient it can cause itself to remain
instantiated in physical systems i also
explain that we do not know exactly how
it is created but we know that it can
arise out of no knowledge via the
process of natural selection and that
another process for creating new
knowledge is what happens in the brain
when we think science does not know if
there are new laws that govern this type
of resilient information but rooting
knowledge in counterfactuals is the
right approach to creating a corpus of
such laws this is not least because the
approach fire counterfactuals frees
knowledge from all the subjective
connotations that have traditionally
plagued theories of it end quote yes and
so this is a popularian view of
knowledge this is a an addition
on top of or goes deeper in some sense
than papa's view of knowledge but popper
is of course an escape from all the
subjective connotations that have
traditionally plagued theories of
knowledge so he certainly took the
subjectivity out of knowledge okay his
entire epistemology was to talk about
objective knowledge and i've spoken
about this before if you're interested
one of my
episodes is just called objective
knowledge it's literally about poppa's
view of this stuff let's see what kiara
adds this she writes quote moreover with
counterfactuals knowledge becomes a
physical entity rooted in the resilience
of a particular kind of information
which is an objective counterfactual
property independent of observers
sentient beings and the like the most
far-reaching consequence of this shift
is that some open problems that have
been traditionally labeled as spiritual
mystical and even religious such as
finding laws and regularities about
knowledge and its evolution can
via that shift be posed firmly within
the scientific domain without appeal to
dogmas or supernatural ideas this is the
first necessary step in order to solve
these problems of via scientific methods
and it relies on counterfactuals end
quote yes so knowledge as useful
information
as information that solves problems is
going to tend to get itself replicated
in the minds of entities out there and
indeed well in the minds of entities
whether those entities count as living
or not so you could have some robotic
system which doesn't count as living by
some criteria depending upon how you
define things it may not replicate it
may be incapable or not want to
reproduce but it still counts as a
thinking conscious thing i don't know
are all thinking conscious things
necessarily alive certainly not all
alive things are conscious and thinking
like bacteria or trees but if you're a
scientist looking into outer space and
you find structures technologies
industry buildings out there that
have been created by an intelligence
then you've found a kind of knowledge
instantiated in those industries that
building whatever it happens to be the
dyson sphere that you find you've found
explanatory knowledge of a kind and it's
not about that knowledge being in the
mind of any particular subject it's not
subjective it's out there having an
effect on reality taking advantage of
knowledge of physical laws knowledge of
matter and so on and so forth let's keep
going okay right quote this switch
removes from the shoulders of scientists
and rationalists a heavy burden that
comes with those problems and apparent
dilemma which goes like this
on the one hand there are certain
phenomena that require explanation
phenomena such as artificial selection
the unfolding of creativity at the level
of the individual with new theoretical
ideas popping up in various disciplines
as a result of individual creativity and
of society with the progress of
civilization we are intrigued by these
phenomena and compelled to understand
them in depth yet contrary to this
intuition it is often anathema to
scientists to talk about the creativity
in human brains knowledge and related
phenomena as having any real
significance this is because of a
prejudice that affects the sciences in
much the same way that prejudices of
other kinds affect religious thinking
knowledge is regarded suspiciously as
anthropocentric subjective and related
to descartes mind body dualism which is
the root of all sorts of misconceptions
that are also deeply entrenched in
religious thinking as a result many open
problems about the human mind and
knowledge creation are sometimes
regarded as not interesting by some
scientists the contemplation of the
possibility of laws applying to
knowledge and the like appears like
literal nonsense to part of the
scientific community some retreat to the
domain of reductionism and materialism
denying that knowledge is a phenomenon
requiring an explanation others simply
ignore the question thinking that it
goes several steps too far into stuff
that is not proper science end quote my
reflection on that yes well you know
some physicists are irrational some
physicists will say well we don't have
to have experimentally testable theories
i've talked about that before some
physicists will say well all we need is
to have an instrumentalist view of
quantum theory so
well
what scientists what particular
scientists regard as proper science is
of no concern okay science can be
universal in its approach to looking at
problems some problems will be just by
definition outside of its capacity to
really make deep inroads into so for
example
moral questions now what should be the
case because science is about what is
the case what is going on right now how
do we explain this particular phenomenon
now if you're trying to consider trying
to construct a theory of what should be
the case well now you've immediately
left science just by definition or if
you want to prove a particular theorem
well you don't need to worry about the
experimental testability of that
particular thing it's independent of
science but for anything that exists
name it you know name name your thing
even the existence of religion of this
thing called religion that's amenable to
scientific study in the sense that you
can come up with theories and then you
can go out and try and refute these
theories you know look in the world to
see if your theory is actually refuted
by
the existence of any particular religion
that's out there right now or ever has
existed let's say and so too with
knowledge these conceptions of knowledge
that talk about knowledge as being
just a
thing that people think that's just
going on inside of human minds well it's
wrong and we know it's wrong because
well popular explained knowledge is
instantiated in physical objects it can
be written into books it can appear in
our microscopes and technology
that's knowledge knowledge has this
objective character it doesn't matter
what
particular scientists or philosophers or
anyone thinks okay
people who want to make progress can
just
largely ignore the gain sayers you know
you just will you know sometimes it's
important to just solve your problem to
find the thing that you're interested in
and solving whether someone wants to
call what you're doing science or not
should have no bearing on your capacity
to make progress who cares what names
they call you i suppose you're not a
scientist okay fine you're the only real
scientist then it doesn't it doesn't
matter let's keep on going on this
question of whether or not things like
knowledge
is amenable to a scientific study okay
right it's quote
but counterfactuals provide a way out of
this trouble if we use counterfactuals
to define knowledge as information with
the ability to last such as that in
genes that code for useful adaptations
and creativity has the ability to create
new knowledge we are able to free them
of any subjective tinge making them
objective this is still very far from
providing a theory of those phenomena
but it provides a scientific handle on
knowledge by grounding it in the laws of
physics
causing them my reflection just to say
wonderful that's great isn't it that's
very very cool that we have this
physical way this is this this kind of
inroad
into
knowledge creation and epistemology from
physics via constructor theory let's
keep on going yeah right after taking
this step one can make further useful
moves
first consider as a problem for physics
the fact that certain systems in the
biosphere exhibit a property that no
other system in the known universe has
namely creativity the ability to create
new knowledge by thinking human brains
have this ability it may be that other
systems say beetroot plants have it too
but it is at best much less manifest
than it is for humans
pausing my reflection you don't know
about that this is one of those areas
where i would just say i'm postulating
that
anything like a beetroot plant having
the capacity for
a creativity of that kind
let's say we should specify the creation
of explanatory knowledge what problem
does it solve what do we notice about
beetroot plants now perhaps someone does
have that problem they
they think that the beetroot plant
actually
maybe there is some observation out
there that is crying out for explanation
in the form of well the only way to
understand what's going on there with
that beetroot plant is
it's explaining the world
it's it's got a problem and it's trying
to create the solution by conjecturing
explanations
maybe maybe we don't know enough but um
at the moment i i don't know that we
have
such a problem anyway let's keep going
okay right quote now thanks to our
objective definition of knowledge
stating facts like this that human
brains can create knowledge is no longer
vulnerable to allegations of
anthropocentrism claiming that it is
anthropocentric would be equivalent to
considering the statement a dishwasher
has special properties among all the
known systems in the known universe as
supporting a dishwasher-centric view of
the universe clearly it does not it is
an objective statement about the fact
that dishwashers can do certain things
such as quickly scrubbing away dirt from
cutlery and crockery and being unchanged
by the experience to an accuracy that is
unparalleled in the known universe
likewise the statement human brains are
capable of constructing new knowledge is
not anthropocentric the relevant
difference between the case of human
brains and that of dishwashing machines
is that the detailed functionality of
being
knowledge creating is not as well
understood as the functionality of
dishwashing machines pausing near my
reflection that would be to understate
things so
we understand very well to high fidelity
to the point where if something goes
wrong with your dishwashing machine you
can fix it so they continue to dishwash
but on the other hand
knowledge creation we understand
basically next to nothing about how it
happens we know that all people do we
know that it's occurring in the brain in
some way manifested in the ideas which
are in the mind and so on and so forth
but we don't understand you know the
genesis of any particular bit of
knowledge that we create the brain is
doing something
remarkably unusual and although we carry
around this head with us all the time
it's almost simultaneously the thing
most opaque to us we just don't know
where the ideas and
conjectures are coming from
we just know that we have them
let's keep going cowards still via the
counterfactual notion of knowledge one
can now refer to knowledge creation in
an objective fashion it is the first
essential step in regarding problems
about creativity as pertaining to the
domain of science which is in turn step
zero to even hoping to address them
effectively quite right
another consequence of this switch is
that we can consider a number of other
related issues as coming into the domain
of science there are several examples
first there is the issue of whether
there are other systems in the universe
with the same creative capabilities as
the human brain other species on earth
other forms of life on other planets or
possibly existing and future artificial
intelligence related to this is the
problem of understanding how knowledge
comes into the world understanding the
thinking process and creativity from the
point of view of physics and information
theory starting from our objective
definition of knowledge we can wonder
properly within science about such
questions as
how can one set up that creative ability
in a computer is the termination of
creativity with death necessary as some
would like to argue or is it actually
possible to defer death to later and
later in life by means of some sort of
error correction what is it exactly that
we have to store an error correct can a
person be copied stored and downloaded
into another embodiment when the time of
death for the body approaches each of
these topics requires very careful
consideration and it could be the
subject of countless research programs
here i just want to point out one fact
whatever your view on these questions it
is far easier to approach them from the
point of view of science free of the
prejudice that knowledge related issues
are anthropocentric subjective and
non-scientific counterfactuals allow one
to take all these issues seriously and
fully within the scientific method end
quote and that's great that's great now
kara then goes through a
couple of
stories one about alexander the great
that i'm not going to read and basically
at the end of his long
journeys of conquest he comes back to
his home and basically becomes depressed
because he's done it all has nothing
left for him to do so he becomes
depressed at the fact that he has
nothing left to accomplish kind of thing
he's profoundly dissatisfied but on the
other hand kiara compares this to
odysseus another a figure from greek
mythology who goes on all of his
adventures but comes back excited for
having been on the adventures and he's
learned so much and he just wants to do
so much more in fact i'll just read the
end of what kiara says her commentary on
comparing these two particular tales
from antiquity she writes quote unlike
alexander odysseus has not lost himself
at the end of the story but has acquired
more knowledge and has the ability to
put it to some future use the end of the
odyssey has a firm higher point than its
start which is essential for future
improvement it is richer in
possibilities which are a special case
of counterfactuals alexander by contrast
has lost his capacity to dream of
further deeds his creativity and all the
knowledge acquired along the way is
therefore useless because it cannot be
put to any further use
end quote so this is a wonderful
comparison of modern intellectuals two
ways of going be odysseus be optimistic
learn as much as you possibly can and
realize in becoming enriched with
knowledge that there is always more to
learn and problems to solve then this is
unending
don't be like alexander the pessimist
who upon gaining all this knowledge
thinks that well it's just about all
finished we've just about discovered
everything we can and in fact i'm so
brilliant and i'm so smart that i've
already figured out all of these
problems that are definitely going to
kill if not my present generation and
certainly my children or their
children's generation because it's
inevitable that humans are going to be
destructive there's nothing more for us
to accomplish nothing to look forward to
everything is dark and grim that appears
to be this comparison between odysseus
and alexander these two visions of
reality and we here like to be odysseus
we here like to gain as much explanatory
knowledge but realize we're always at
the beginning just scratching the
surface and the
every problem solved opens up a new
vista of just more and more problems
let's keep on going because this is now
coming
right to the end of the book
and so let's read the last few
paragraphs and kyo right quite more
generally any journey without
necessarily being literally an exact
circle can still be a successful nostos
of sorts and its end can be a positive
uplifting fact what matters is whether
along the journey the character has or
has not managed to create more knowledge
while preserving his or her own
individual capacity to create new
knowledge so an ending can be a fertile
starting point it depends on whether the
character reaching the end is still
capable of being creative in fact a
successful nostos does not have an
ending its ending is just the starting
point of new adventures
end quote there's still a bit left to
read but i just want to highlight the
fact isn't that reminiscent doesn't that
echo the beginning of infinity and
certainly the sentiments of the
beginning infinity and david deutsch's
world view great to see this
influence permeating this book here it's
throughout the book but here
particularly at the end let's keep on
going by the way kiara's using this word
nostos which is the greek for a
particular kind of story in ancient
greece which is a kind of a circular
kind of a journey you know someone
beginning in a certain place and coming
all the way back to the start but as she
says there you don't want a perfect
circle it's not approximately a circle
okay you you solve the problem and in
finding the solution it reveals more
problems so you're kind of back to this
start you know why
you haven't been relieved of all
problems in fact you've just got more
again but they're better problems
hopefully by poppa's lights anyway and
as she writes quote just as with a
nostos there may be no actual ending for
a book either provided that something
particular occurs while the reader goes
through the book when a reader makes his
way through a book a unique relationship
is established between the book and the
reader which grows within the space that
the writer philip pullman has
masterfully called the borderland the
relationship is entirely based on
counterfactuals the knowledge that the
reader creates in their mind while
reading the book and it is something
unique and private to the reader
whenever knowledge creation happens
while the book is read the reader
undergoes a nostos even once the book is
completed implications of the knowledge
created along the way stay with the
reader for as long as the reader's mind
survives and can be put to some use in
the future in that case the book does
not really have an end pausing there my
reflection on that and moreover
the knowledge that has been instantiated
in the text of a book by the author
is not always the knowledge that is
gained by the reader the reader has to
go through this process of interpreting
what is written there on the page and
they may pick up subtly different
lessons and they may even go on to
create in their minds new knowledge
which goes beyond what is in the book as
well
so this is an interesting feature of the
transmission of knowledge or memes that
happens between people last paragraph
and this is of course where we're going
to end it today
and the kia rights quote as i am writing
these lines i'm thinking of you my
reader like a modern odysseus
you are now emerging from this journey
approaching the end you can moor the
boat at the wharf take a well-deserved
rest at the hostel that overlooks the
harbour and look back through your
memories considering them carefully as
you are pondering all the ideas
encountered in the book perhaps a smile
lights up your face
before you there are still vast
unexplored waters
waiting for you to take to the sea once
more and create further knowledge
may the knowledge you discovered in this
book serve you well on the journey
the end that's the end of the book and a
beautiful way to end them and hopefully
my scenes have captured something of the
poetry especially of this final chapter
here today
and so that's the end of the science of
canon cart and yes i'm sure people will
ask um will i have a discussion with
cara and no doubt i will at some stage
i'm not sure when
but that will be what remains of my
discussions of the science mechanic
harness to speak with the author herself
about
what's been done since perhaps the
publication of this book
and
what deeper insights we might be able to
look forward to when it comes to the
application of constructor theory to our
deepest problems until next time bye
[Music]
up